[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>DR. SUE MORTER: Is it
possible that our brain is not
the only thinking
organ in our body?
Why are we often told
to follow our heart?
HeartMath, Incorportated
and the HeartMath Institute
aim to help people bring
their physical, mental,
and emotional
systems into balance
by connecting the brain
with the intuitive guidance
of the heart.
Take a look.
>> Research shows that when we
shift into a coherent state,
the heart and brain
operate synergistically,
like two systems
that mesh into one.
You can learn how to
activate and sustain
this synergy between
the heart and brain
and prevent stress
producing patterns,
along with increasing our
mental clarity and discernment
capacity.
When we do this, our
creative solutions
for personal, social,
and global challenges
become more accessible,
providing us
with more intuitive
access and flow.
Over the past 20 years,
the Institute of HeartMath
has produced coherence
building techniques
that are intentionally
simple and based
on scientific research.
Our mission team is
to simplify a process
for intuitive connection to
the soul's wisdom and guidance
for unfolding who we truly are.
New research suggests that our
energetic or spiritual heart
is an access point for our
natural inner technology,
the heart's intuitive
intelligence which
can elevate our
communications, decisions,
and choices to a much higher
level of effectiveness.
>>SUE: With us today is Dr.
Deborah Rozman, president
and CEO of HeartMath.
She is a psychologist
with over 30 years
experience as an entrepreneur,
business executive, educator,
and author.
Deborah also serves on the
Institute of HeartMath's
scientific advisory board.
Welcome, Deborah,
to "Healing Matrix."
>>DEBORAH ROZMAN: Thank you.
I'm so honored to be here.
>>SUE: Tell us
what HeartMath is.
>>ROZMAN: Well,
HeartMath was based
on a vision of Doc Childre
the founder where he saw
and anticipated in the
early 70s actually,
this huge increase
of stress that
was going to be
happening for humanity.
And also seeing that the role
of the heart in the human system
and that that was the next
level of human evolution,
was heart-based living.
And what that really
meant that the heart was
an intelligent system,
that it actually
has connections to the brain,
the body, spirit, if you will,
that were really important
for us to understand.
So when we started researching
at the HeartMath Institute,
we looked at every form of
biofeedback, EEG, galvanic skin
response, the EKG data.
We discovered with a lot of help
from our scientific advisory
board to look at the spaces
between the heartbeats measured
by heart rate variability.
And in looking at that, we
found that we could actually
see changes in the pattern of
the heart rhythm, heart rate
variability based
on how we felt.
So we felt loving, caring,
grateful, appreciative,
the qualities associated
with the heart, the uplifting
qualities, that pattern
became very smooth and ordered
and harmonious.
And when we were frustrated,
stressed, worried, anxious,
that pattern became very
chaotic, very incoherent.
And I know we're going
to talk more about it.
But what was really
our intention
was to create a simple system,
a simple user-friendly system
of how people could
learn to distinguish
that voice of the heart that
could give them clear guidance
and direction from all the
other signals, the worried mind,
the ambition, the emotionalism,
the pulls of the heart.
How do we know what's really
that true heart talking?
And be able to create a
simple system based on science
that the taxi cab driver, the
yoga master, the Indian chief,
it didn't matter who, could use.
And so we also wanted to really
focus on the different conduits
to society and how to language
this heart stuff for law
enforcement, for the military,
for schools and educators,
regardless of their
belief systems,
for all aspects of society.
We've been working in
hospitals and health care.
And it's been an
incredible adventure
taking these simple
techniques and then having
it peer-reviewed science.
Like, our first
breakthrough which
showed the critical link
between our inner state,
our emotional state, our
consciousness and the heart
rate variability or the
rhythms of the heart
was published in the "American
Journal of cardiology" in 1995.
So we've been really
focused on peer reviewed
mainstream to really reach
a lot of skeptical people
and help them understand
how they could make
that shift from head to heart.
>>SUE: Why do you think
the awareness of living
in heart-based reality
being so important
has been elusive to our
culture, our medical culture,
our scientific communities?
Why do you think that?
Is it because it's an
invisible connection.
And there weren't
little cables to follow
to track its
impressive influence
on our bodies and our lives.
What do you have?
>>ROZMAN: No, I think
it's an aspect of you
look at the unfolding
of human evolution.
And all these ancient
cultures east or west,
Greeks, Babylonians,
Egyptians, Chinese,
all talked about the
heart as the center
of intelligence and wisdom.
And some people practiced
it through their religions
and moral codes which really
were based upon our heart
connection and taking care
of each other and kindness
and respect for other people.
And then as our intellects
started to develop
and the research in
the Renaissance times
began to separate the
heart and the head.
And it became like everything
was from the neck up
and the heart was
relegated to a blood pump.
>>SUE: Just to keep us alive
long enough to think more.
>>ROZMAN: Right, exactly.
Or to walk around, right?
And we forgot that the
heart has more than that.
And that was only in the
1990s, which has been
called the decade of the brain.
It's really also the
decade of the heart.
Because that's when this new
field of neural cardiology
developed where a lot
of the research that
had been done 20 years earlier,
but just talking about oh, you,
know, the heart has these inputs
to the brain that actually
tell the brain what to do.
And then they look,
wait a minute,
there's four different ways
that the heart independently
of the brain
communicates to the body.
Oh, and there's 40,000
neurons in the heart that
are sensory neurons, a
little brain in the heart.
And this little brain has
neurons that can sense, feel,
learn, remember.
And guess what, they're telling
the brain pattern matching up
here what to do.
And so what's familiar,
the pattern is here.
But the heart is
actually giving input
that can change that
in incredible ways.
And if we learn how to go to our
heart, shift our heart rhythms,
listen to our heart, we can
change the neural traffic
going from heart to brain.
Because of the neural traffic
going between the two,
most people think the
brain controls the heart.
90% is the other way.
It's afferent.
It's the heart telling
the brain like Morse code
what's going on in the body.
>>SUE: And this is
what has duped us.
Because we think
that thinking is
what drives the whole system.
And as we bring our mind's
attention to our heart,
we enhance and magnify
this and turn it
into a superhighway between
the heart and the head.
>>ROZMAN: Absolutely.
>>SUE: Because we
know more what to do.
>>ROZMAN: And we
get our heart rhythm
in this harmonious pattern,
that signals the thalamus, which
synchronize critical function.
It signals the
amygdala, which is
responsible for strong
emotional memory all
the way to the frontal lobe.
So our higher reasoning
capacity comes
in when we're in our
heart, when we're loving.
When we are caring.
Those aren't just
sweet qualities.
They are key fuel, or
drivers of the rhythm that
illuminates the brain mind.
And so love is important
not just for connection
and for fulfillment
and feeling, it's
important for higher
consciousness.
>>SUE: It's not just what
Hallmark Cards and holidays,
say, Valentine's Day are
made of, it's so much more.
So, so much more.
So what does it mean to
activate one's heart?
>>ROZMAN: Activating
the heart is a choice
to shift out of here or
strong emotions or reactions
and actually shift
to the tension here.
And actually almost
all of our techniques
start with
heart-focused breathing,
where you're actually
finding a nice, easy rhythm
as you imagine your
breath flowing in
through the area of
the heart and out
through the area of the heart.
As you do that, if we had you
hooked up to our heart rhythm
monitor, you'd see
the two sides of
the autonomic nervous
system, parasympathetic
and synthetic starting to
come into harmonious balance.
And most of our
stress and diseases
are created, initiated by
autonomic nervous system
disregulation.
The autonomic nervous system--
yoga knows this, that's
all about regulating that--
is responsible for 90% of our
body's involuntary functions,
from digestion to hormonal
to immune response
to how well we sleep
to our stress response.
If we can go to
our heart and start
making that shift to activate
heart-focused breathing
and then activate, choose
a heart quality that
allows us to get into that
heart rhythm coherence
and sustain that harmonious
state so the heart has a chance
to tell the brain
everything's cool, open up,
that's a self activation.
It's a choice to feel grateful.
It shifts heart rhythm.
It shifts brain rhythm.
It shifts the autonomic
nervous system.
And it puts you in a
state more connected
with your soul,
spirit, who you are.
>>SUE: Beautiful, and we get
to get into some of the details
about how that works.
First, I just want to ask, what
is the mission of HeartMath?
Big picture, what's
the mission here?
>>ROZMAN: The big
picture is to help
activate the heart of humanity.
>>SUE: Well, that's a good one.
>>ROZMAN: And that has
so many implications.
We see what's happening
in society today.
It's really old stuff releasing.
It's scary.
But it's like turning the
paradigm upside down where
the head and the mind and all
our differences and separations
aren't controlling
everything-- and our biases--
to where our heart
is more in charge.
And that helps us see
we're all connected.
So the implications
of that helping
to activate the
heart of humanity
is it helps to bring our
mind, emotions, body, spirit,
into connection with
our intuitive guidance
and our connection
with each other.
We are all connected
in the heart.
>>SUE: When
everyone's doing that,
we can see that we're connected.
We can resonate.
>>ROZMAN: Right, we are.
And it's measurable.
>>SUE: Beautiful.
>>ROZMAN: We can feel it,
and we can measure it.
And that's cool.
>>SUE: We know so much about
intelligence and brain biology.
But what about the heart?
Does the heart have the capacity
to store thoughts, memories,
and emotions too?
Let's take a look as Gregg
Braden from "Missing Links"
tells us about
memory and the heart.
>>GREGG BRADEN: This is a story
that happened in a small town
in the Midwest.
It was a story of an
eight-year-old girl
who received the heart of
another little girl who
was only two years older,
a 10-year-old girl.
And the heart transplant
was successful.
And typically this
is what happens.
The doctors will try to match
the heart from the donor
to the recipient
within a range of ages
so that a very young person
isn't getting the older
heart of a very older person.
So the young girl, she
received the heart.
The transplant was successful.
But something happened
almost immediately.
She began having a dream,
a reoccurring dream.
And it was a bad dream.
So we will call it a nightmare.
And she began having
this nightmare
over and over and over again.
It wasn't every single night.
But it was multiple
times a week.
It was common enough that
her doctor recognized
that something
else was going on.
And it was something that was
out of his realm of expertise.
So the doctor said,
I've done my job.
I've given you a new heart.
It is successful.
Now, you can go live your life.
And I think you need
to speak with someone
else about the dreams
that you're experiencing.
So the doctor set her
up with a psychiatrist.
And the psychiatrist
recognized immediately, this
wasn't a typical dream.
It had the characteristics
of a memory.
Because the memory of
the girl who was killed
was preserved in the
cells of her heart
that are now in the body of
the new recipient, the younger
girl, and she was able
to share those memories
with the authorities.
And I'm sharing this story
with you for one reason.
That is how real the
memory is in our hearts.
It's not a metaphor.
>>SUE: This is remarkable.
How is this possible?
>>ROZMAN: Well, if you think
about what I said that there's
sensory neurons in
the heart called
a little brain in the heart
that neuro cardiologists have
validated, then those
sensory neurons not
only sense and feel that
they learn and remember.
So just like a memory in
your brain is imprinted,
especially a strong memory like
what this child experienced,
the heart retains.
And then there's
other books that
talk about other case
studies of the same thing.
It usually fades after a
while as the person's own soul
and spirit take over.
But it's been documented
numerous times
that a transplant
recipient actually
starts to want to eat
what the donor liked.
And again, it's not a mystery.
There's neurons in the heart.
The fact that our
heart has a brain
and it functions independent
from this brain but they talk
is a paradigm shift.
That means we need to learn
how to interact with this heart
brain and what it's
designed to do.
>>SUE: We have known
of course, forever,
that the heart beats to keep
the body physically alive
et cetera.
And now we're recognizing
that there are so many more
powers of the heart.
Can you just kind of circle the
wagons here and land it for us?
What else is it that
the heart is doing?
>>ROZMAN: Well, I'm not going
to say that I know everything
because there's a lot of
mystery around the heart.
But what we do know and research
is the heart communicates
with the brain and body
in at least four ways.
One way is what we've
been talking about,
the neural traffic, the afferent
traffic the signals the heart
sends to the brain.
And those signals are largely
transmitted through our heart
rate variability, or
heart rhythm pattern,
and the brain pattern matches
from what's familiar to it.
And then it chooses a response.
We also know of course,
there's a blood pressure wave.
And that's not just
beating blood pressure
to keep us active.
There's actually information
in the blood that
is informing the brain
and body in terms
of the wholeness of the system.
Then there's the electromagnetic
field of the heart.
And I think that's
really exciting
because think of your heart
like a radio transmitter.
With every heartbeat, it's
putting out 2.5 watts of power.
And just like a cell phone
tower or a radio transmitter,
it is radiating out that energy.
And it can be measured three
to five feet from the body
with magnetometers.
But most of us know
and feel that it
can go a lot farther than that.
And when that heart
beat is radiating,
it is also sending
information just
like a radio
station, a frequency.
You tune the dial on
a radio to 101 FM,
and you hear a
different station.
You talk on your cell phone,
which can go through walls.
Magnetic fields
goes through walls,
that's how it picks up the
signal from the cell phone
tower.
That's how we are picking
up each other's hearts.
And what we feel
is radiated through
that electromagnetic field.
If we feel love, care,
appreciation, kindness,
compassion, what have
been called the uplifting
qualities of the heart,
the renewing, regenerating
qualities, that creates
the program that goes out.
And actually in
our lab, we've been
able to see that
that pattern shows up
in the brain waves of people
standing three feet away not
even touching.
So we are influencing
each other by our vibes.
And of course, the
kids know that.
They use that term all the time.
Well, he's got bad vibes.
She's got great vibes.
They're not even
seeing each other.
They're feeling it
and picking it up.
And that's the electromagnetic
field of the heart.
When we're frustrated,
angry, hateful,
those are putting out those
very incoherent heart rhythm
patterns, stress patterns, those
stress waves are going out.
And we feel that.
You can walk into a room
where people have been angry.
And they're not talking
and you go, uhh.
>>SUE: What's going on in here?
>>ROZMAN: And we're saying, we
can cut the air with a knife,
right?
And you can go
into a place where
people have just been meditating
or having a loving experience.
And you feel uplifted.
Wow, what's been
going on in here.
Again, it's in our
language, vibration.
We feel each other's vibes.
So what can we do to
raise our own vibration
and help others raise theirs?
And again, the heart
plays a key role in that.
>>SUE: Does the
body or the Earth
play a role in
stabilizing our ability
to trust what's
happening in the heart?
>>ROZMAN: Well, what's
really exciting to me.
And I love this research
that the Global Coherence
Initiative, which is an
initiative of the HeartMath
Institute has found, is that
the core of the Earth, there
is magnetic field emanating
from its iron core,
it's operating on frequencies
just like the heart is.
And that these frequencies that
are emanating from the Earth's
magnetic field, the
heart of the Earth,
overlap human
cardiovascular frequencies.
So what that means is that as
the Earth's field is shook up
through whatever, that it
can affect our heart rhythm
patterns, our health and
our wellness and our peace.
And as the Earth's fields,
as we put out love and care
to Mother Earth
and to each other,
it's like a feedback loop.
We are coupling with the Earth's
cardiovascular system, which
at 0.1 Hertz is the same
rhythm as a coherent heart
rhythm, the same rhythm as
when we're feeling love.
It's the Earth's
resonant frequency,
nature's resonant frequency.
And that can amplify
our love and compassion
all over this planet.
So part of our hypothesis is
that as more and more people
practice heart-based living, as
more and more people practice
shifting to the
heart and forgiving,
having compassionate latitude,
loving, caring, appreciating,
putting out that coherent heart
rhythm, that physics sine wave
that it couples with
the Earth's rhythm
and creates a virtuous feedback
loop that can really help lift
the vibration of humanity.
>>SUE: In your book,
"Heart Intelligence,"
you speak about three
types of intuiting.
What are they?
>>ROZMAN: Well, there's
the non-local intuition
we were just talking about
coming from somewhere.
Like. a practical example
that I think many of us
have experienced is when you
have a friend you haven't
talked to in a long, long time.
And you think about them, and
the phone rings and that's
who it is.
There's something non-local
there that's communicating.
Then there's
energetic sensitivity,
which is picking up
each other's vibes
and how in tune we are
to each other's feelings.
And that's where
compassion and empathy
can help us become more
attuned in a way that
is more coherent and
centered and poised
where we're not taking on
the negativity of somebody
else, which is a whole other
topic we could talk about.
But heart coherence really
helps us lift above that
and really feel that energetic
attunement in a larger way.
Then there's what's
called implicit memory,
implicit intuition.
And that's like where
you've learned something
and it pops back up.
There's your mind, brain,
heart, synthesize information
or experiences you had.
So you get a sense of
intuitive direction.
And that's the only
kind of intuition
that most scientists
acknowledges intuition.
>>SUE: So it's a beautiful
combination of awarenesses.
And I just wanted to
say, anyone can do this?
>>ROZMAN: We call what anyone
can do, practical intuition,
which anybody can do.
And practical intuition
is for example,
focusing on your heart,
shifting to your heart,
pretending the breath is
flowing in through the heart
and actually putting out
a coherent heart quality.
When you do that, it
opens the vehicle.
It's synchronizes your
heart, brain, nervous system
so you can access intuition.
And in that moment,
anybody can do that.
Like, you might ask, what
would be the most appropriate
response in this situation?
Should I call him,
or should I wait?
Should I this, or should I that?
How do we know of what
things were confused?
If we go deep into our
heart and do that technique,
you can get a clear
inner knowing answer.
That's practical intuition.
Because it's meant for us to
access that moment-to-moment,
not just when we're
praying or meditating.
And that's beautiful.
Because the more we do that,
moment-to-moment, the more it
creates a whole
new neural habit.
It starts to replace our
triggered stress habits.
It starts to replace
the traumatic memories.
It starts to heal so that we
really can be more aligned
and connected with our spirit,
our soul, or who we really are
and unfold that in
our life day-to-day.
>>SUE: What happens when
we're out of coherence,
when that's not happening?
What happens physiologically?
What happens interactively?
Speak to us.
>>ROZMAN: Well, our normal state
of the autonomic nervous system
is in no coherent.
So it's not coherent.
Because as soon as
you raise your arm
or do what I'm doing here,
the sympathetic nervous system
is activated.
And then there's not going to
be that heart rhythm coherence.
We want to be able to
jump up and run or go
right down to quiet.
Relaxation response is the
parasympathetic nervous system.
The activation whether
we're excited or joyful
or feeling great or moving
around is the sympathetic.
But when we're frustrated
or angry or stressed,
the sympathetic nervous
system gets overactive.
And we really see a jagged,
irregular, incoherent wave
form.
The stronger we feel
upset or angry or worried,
the more it looks
like an earthquake.
And it really is reflecting
how we feel inside.
That's what's so amazing to
me about the inner balance.
Or anyway, our heart
rate variability feedback
is showing us what is
happening in your heart
as you're feeling state changes.
So it mirrors it,
your emotional state.
And that's a big wow.
It certainly was for me.
When you first see that, you
go, oh, my god, this is real.
>>SUE: Yeah, yeah.
It's interesting
how the mind needs
to see something like this
and then it clicks in.
And it certainly makes sense why
heart attacks and these kinds
of things are happening when
that disconnection is there.
It's so.
So very obvious.
>>ROZMAN: Heart
break, heartache,
that electrical energy is
feeding back on the heart
because it's in stress.
And there's so
many lonely people
in the world that are
actually in a stress state
whether it's become habituated.
So they don't even
acknowledge it
or feel it anymore, just normal
cut off from their heart.
But the good news is, it doesn't
take a lot to reopen the heart.
And that's the hope.
>>SUE: I find that
when people are
in this state of
loneliness, and I
think this is really important
for our viewers to understand,
that if we are in a
state of loneliness,
we just feel disconnected
and that no one gets
us or understands that
when we bring the mind's
attention to the
heart, it automatically
eases that sense of aloneness.
Now there's a connectivity,
a sense of well-being.
And such an important
initial step
for people to realize
that anyone can do that.
Just start dropping into and
paying attention to your heart.
And know you're going to
share some things with us
about how to.
How to make sure that we know
that we're getting this done.
>>ROZMAN: And I have to say,
some people when they shift
to the heart because it's
been closed off for a while
feel pain in the area
of the heart or an ache
or feel closed down.
It does take, if
that's your case,
just keep self-soothing
as you shift to the heart
and find something
to feel grateful
for, something to appreciate or
feel compassion for yourself,
kindness for yourself.
All that is love energy.
And all that is going to heal
and start to reopen the heart.
We say I love you
with all my heart.
You don't say I love you--
>>SUE: With all my brain, right.
>>ROZMAN: And the heart has
that healing power and that love
power to do that if we
start using techniques
such as the simple
one I'll teach.
>>SUE: Yes, and the helpful
thing is it is measurable.
And you brought
some graphs with you
to show us that's happening.
So could you just explain to
us what we're seeing here?
>>ROZMAN: All right, so
what you're seeing here
is a graph of heart
rate variability.
You can see on the bottom
with the red squiggly lines,
that's your EKG.
And with each heartbeat,
your heart rate is changing.
Your heart rate's not 70
or 60 beats per minute.
That's an average over a minute.
If you look at the
left side, the Y-axis,
you can see this person's
heart rate is going within 20
different points up and down.
But you can see each point
there that's being graphed
creates a pattern
overall, over time.
So that's called the heart's
rhythm, the heart rhythm
pattern.
And that's a nice start of
a nice sine wave pattern.
Make sense?
>>SUE: Yes, yes.
And then, OK.
>>ROZMAN: So here what you're
seeing is the emotional state.
This is the same person.
We asked him to recall a
time that he felt stressed.
And you can see how jaggedy and
irregular the top graph pattern
is.
>>SUE: And this is
being measured how?
>>ROZMAN: It's through the
heart rate variability.
This is all heart
rate variability.
It's measured through a pulse
sensor that you clip on.
I can even show you.
I brought one with me.
You clip it onto your earlobe.
And you turn it on.
And then it has
a smartphone app.
Or we have several different
devices, handheld and computer
device too.
And you turn it on.
And when you do that, it
starts to in real time
measure your heart
rate and convert it
into heart rate variability
and look for how much
coherence or incoherence and
will display that exact graph.
>>SUE: And so this person
was hooked up to this.
And then you asked them to
recall some stressful things.
>>ROZMAN: Yeah, let's go
back to the last graph
again for a moment.
OK, so then we taught them
the quick coherence technique.
And it took less than
a minute and they
shifted to the bottom heart
rate, variability heart rhythm
pattern.
That's what's so beautiful
is the wow that you
can go from the top graph
to the bottom graph.
Anybody can in
less than a minute.
And the more you practice
this, that shift, the more
the coherent pattern
starts to become imprinted.
And you change your baseline.
So it changes your
baseline perception
about yourself and life.
And it changes your
stress response.
You're more in
charge of yourself.
>>SUE: And the mind and
memory then remembers
this as your new baseline.
This is who I am.
This is all I have to be doing.
I don't have to be doing
this other stuff in my head
and recreating that.
So then, even when someone is
in an emotionally upsetting
situation and it's ongoing,
they can use this practice
underneath this
situation in real time
and generate coherence
right in the middle
of an emotional situation?
>>ROZMAN: Exactly, and that's
what we teach law enforcement
police officers to do.
We teach soldiers to do it
because they need to be poised.
They need to shift out of fear
wherever the situation is.
How to get into that coherent
rhythm, it's really important.
And of course, it takes practice
to actually instate that
as a new pattern, as a
new way of operating.
It doesn't mean you're
going to walk around always
in bliss or something.
It means you have the ability
to shift and recenter.
>>SUE: Masterly.
>>ROZMAN: Right.
And so what we see
here is the ability--
when you're in that coherent
wave form, what happens
is you now have more of what
we call situational awareness.
It expands your perception.
>>SUE: So this slide
here showing the brain,
talk us through this.
>>ROZMAN: Yeah, this is actually
one of my very favorite slides
because it just shows
on the left graph you
can see a person's
incoherent waveform stressed.
And that is being communicated
from the heart to the brain
to the vagus nerve
that goes directly
to the amygdala, the emotional
memory center, and also
another pathway to the thalamus.
And it desynchronizes
brain function
so you go into fight/flight,
stress response.
Now, the amygdala,
it actually can
trigger what's familiar
like a fear habit
or an anxiety habit
or a stress habit.
Now, when you go into that
heart rhythm coherent wave form,
it's actually sending a
signal to the amygdala that
can evoke more of
the positive memories
or soothe more of the
old familiar habits,
emotional traumas or
the thalamus, which
synchronizes the
brain function all
the way to the frontal lobes.
That gives you that pause,
that expanded awareness,
that ability to make
more conscious decisions,
more heart intelligent choices.
So that one minute shift, and
you practice it over and over,
and then stay there longer,
5 minutes, 10 minutes,
or as part of meditation, really
re-patterns the whole system.
>>SUE: We are
transmuting machines.
We are capable of taking
an incoherent circumstance,
and our perception of
it, which makes it such,
and transferring or transmuting
that into coherence.
>>ROZMAN: Exactly,
and the more we
do that together,
the more it creates
a collective vibrational
increase making
it easier for others.
>>SUE: We're in
tune to one another.
So when one of us
finds this state,
it has an influence
on the biofield
of the next person, the next
person, the next person.
>>ROZMAN: And the more we
have compassion and care
and non-judgment for the people
who have different views,
or who are in fear or stress,
overload, and polarization
from what we might
believe, the more we
activate heart coherence
and radiate that to them,
the more it really helps to
release some of that density.
And so I've learned that
the more aware I am,
the more I'm compelled
to shift to the heart
and actually be kind.
It doesn't mean you condone
or agree with someone
who's angry or frustrated.
But it means you have this
intelligence that understands
based upon their
background and their stress
and you have compassion.
And that helps actually lifts
or clear the energetic field
environment.
It gives a chance.
Love can make a difference.
>>SUE: A chance for love.
>>ROZMAN: A chance for love.
>>SUE: A chance for love,
which is what matters most.
HeartMath has developed
the technology
that anyone can use to practice
and monitor heart brain
coherence techniques.
Take a look at
the inner balance.
>> Now, let's get ready to
start your first session.
>> Center the ear sensor
clip to your earlobe.
Then take the inner
balanced Bluetooth sensor
and attach the larger part by
clipping it to your clothing.
>> If you're using the inner
balance lightening sensor,
plug it into the lightning port.
>> If you're using the inner
balance Bluetooth sensor,
press the rubber button so that
the blue LED starts flashing.
Once you're ready to start,
just tap the Sessions tab
and then hit the Play icon.
If the Play icon is not visible,
tap the center of the screen
to make it appear.
Listen to the audio
which will guide you
through your first session.
>> I'd like you to focus
your attention in the area
of the heart.
>> When you end the
session by hitting stop,
you will have the ability
to select your mood.
You will then see the results
of your first session.
Enjoy your first session
and then when done,
tap the guide section
to find out more
about the many
features and functions
of your inner balance.
>>SUE: Fantastic.
Everyone has a smartphone.
>>ROZMAN: It really does.
>>SUE: Everyone can do this.
Can you share a heart/brain
coherence technique with us
now?
>>ROZMAN: Sure,
I'll be happy to.
Everybody can try this
eyes open, eyes closed.
So the very first step
is shift your focus
of attention out of your head
into the area of your heart
around the center of your chest.
And just pretend
like your breath
is flowing into that
area and out to the area.
But the key is keeping your
focus right there, your center
being your heart center.
>>SUE: In the
front and the back?
All the way through?
>>ROZMAN: Whatever feels right.
The whole idea is not
to be thinking about
whether I'm doing it right,
but to feel the breath flowing
into the area of
the heart and out
through the area of the heart.
Just find a slow easy
rhythm that's comfortable.
You want to breathe a little
more deeply, a little more
slowly than normal.
And again, if you were hooked
up to the inner balance,
you would immediately see
the rhythm start to change.
So quick coherence is to start
with heart focused breathing.
And let's keep doing it.
You want to do that until you
find a nice rhythm, 5, 10,
breaths or more.
And if people just do
that as soon as they feel
triggered, or just do it
for practice 20 times a day,
they all start to notice a whole
shift in their life, even just
doing step 1.
Now, we're going
to add step two.
So continue
heart-focused breathing.
And as you breathe in
through the heart area,
feel like you're breathing
in a quality or attitude
of appreciation or care
for someone or something
in your life, the
person, time in nature,
where you really felt that
gratitude or that care,
focusing on the
heart, pretending
like the breath is flowing in
and out through the heart area.
You can put your
hand on the heart
if it helps you keep
your focus there.
And now activate a
feeling that's renewing,
regenerating like
appreciation or care.
And you can feel it radiate.
>>SUE: Yes, so beautiful.
And even just this brief
moment of connecting with it.
It seeds this in our audience
to be able to now get this.
>>ROZMAN: Exactly, and if you
have trouble sleeping at night,
do this for a few minutes
or as you fall asleep.
And if you're communicating a
challenging message to a child
or to a spouse, do this first.
>>SUE: Yes, thank you.
Thank you for sharing that
very, very, very valid
and important disposition
for people to cultivate.
If we can regulate our
heart/brain coherence,
what does it mean
if energetically we
are all connected.
Now, we're going to take a
look at a phenomenon known
as social coherence.
>> Our scientists are exploring
how we're all interconnected
in the energetic
field environment.
In one independent study, four
people sat around a card table.
Three of them were trained in a
HeartMath coherence technique.
Their heart coherence
was measured
before and during
the experiments.
What's coherence?
You ask.
Personal coherence is when
your heart, mind, emotions,
and physical systems
are operating in sync
and resonating in
cooperative alignment.
So three of the four
people at the table
shifted into coherence using
our heart lock-in technique
while the fourth
person sat quietly.
What do you think happened?
You guessed right.
The fourth person's
heart coherence level
went up too just from being in
that uplifting energetic field.
That's the power
of interconnection.
This experiment was
actually done 10 times
involving 40 people.
They got the same results.
And the uplifting
effects were confirmed.
>>SUE: Can you talk about some
of the current research that
is being done at
HeartMath Institute?
>>ROZMAN: Well, the research
we're doing is many fold.
We are actually looking
at outcome data.
And when people
look at our website,
they'll see some of that.
There's over 11,000
pre and post in terms
of how people reduce anxiety,
improve sleep, reduce
depression and symptoms
that are physical,
that are a result of those kinds
of incoherent stress habits
that we can get into so
easily from headaches
to all sorts of
chronic diseases.
That's on the physical level.
And then on the
creative level, we
see people feeling
more positive outlook,
being more creative in their
jobs, and being more authentic.
Being more connected
and more motivated.
And so that's exciting.
And so we take those pre
and post assessments,
and we share them
with corporations.
We share them with
health care systems
who then want to bring
in HeartMath tools
or get one of their people
certified to actually roll this
out and teach it within
their organization.
And then we research that.
And then on the global
coherence level,
we are innovative
of a new app that
will be able to research
when different individuals
and groups are all
practicing coherence together
and see on a global map and be
able to give them notifications
to practice together and see
how that may be affecting
the Earth's fields.
And we've already had
some pretty astounding
initial results that show our
interconnectivity as we're
locked in the heart together.
>>SUE: The Brazilian
skydiving team
used HeartMath techniques to
coordinate their formation
into a state of
coherence and flow.
Take a look at
how team coherence
can optimize performance
in challenging situations.
>> We were 54 people.
And we met to set a new
Brazilian record building
a formation during freefall.
And this usually
takes about a week.
So we spend a few days
together making a few attempts.
And all the athletes have all
the skills to actually make
the record happen.
But in the first couple
of days of attempts,
we were not quite getting
together in freefall.
There was a little bit
of rush and some stress.
And people were not
really getting in sync.
>> Oh, everybody,
hey, hey, hey, stop.
And then all people look to me.
What's going on?
Come on come on, and everybody
stands in front of me.
And then I used one technique
that we learned here
with HeartMath which coheres
for five or six minutes.
And then when I felt the
field, the energetic field
was kind of quiet.
And then I felt, OK,
we are ready to go.
Of course, this
or not that jump.
We made it.
>> We broke the record.
>> Yeah, we broke it.
Amazing.
>> Yeah, and the cool thing
about it is that we could feel
it in the air, the quietness.
And when we landed
like a bunch of people,
they didn't really know
what we were doing.
But they said to us, wow,
we could feel the quietness.
And we were in ease,
in flow in the air.
>> Everyone was kind
of this low mode.
>>SUE: It's like
a human snowflake.
It's fabulous.
Specifically, what is the Global
Coherence Initiative, Deborah?
Oh, it's a
science-based initiative
to uplift global consciousness
through having individuals
practice more heart rhythm
coherence and have groups
practice more heart
rhythm coherence
and to actually research how
that affects the Earth's fields
and how the Earth's
fields affect us,
which they are all the time.
But how we can
consciously, intentionally
effect the Earth's fields.
There's a lot of indication
that not only are
we not all connected,
but we are all
sharing information all
the time and recognizing
that is happening
through the biofield,
through the Earth's
magnetic fields.
If we can put more coherence
through those information
conduits, it can
really potentially lift
global consciousness and take us
sooner than later towards peace
and cooperation and harmony.
Energetically, it's lifting
the vibration of consciousness
to receive and
perceive at that level.
That's really what the Global
Coherence Initiative is about.
And then each level on
the research on the heart
is enabling us to open
up to new possibilities.
>>SUE: Bringing us back home.
Where can people learn more?
>>ROZMAN: They can
go to heartmath.com.
And they can click
on coherence training
or the different
programs we have
if they're interested in
becoming a certified coach
or mentor and teaching
HeartMath tools.
There's a whole
skill set to others.
They can learn about that there.
We have an add heart
facilitator product
that gives them basic
training and then comes
with the inner balance
sensor and instructions.
So come help us add
heart to the planet.
>>SUE: Thank you
so much for being
with us today and for bringing
your amazing information.
You're teaching us how to
harmonize as an individual,
to find coherence
as a collective,
and showing us how
to wake ourselves up
to a greater truth that is
available to every one of us.
So we are blessed to have you.
Thank you so much.
And I hope to have you
back on the show sometime.
>>ROZMAN: I hope to.
But thank you so much.
And I just want to
leave everybody with--
given what's going on
in the world right now,
please have compassion
for yourself.
We're all going
through ups and downs
because that's the
energetic field.
It's not just you.
So self-compassion, self-care,
compassion for others
are very important.
>>SUE: We're learning how to
navigate that with mastery.
And that's the
purpose of being here.
Dr. Deborah Rozman
and HeartMath team
are bridging humanity
with science.
They are passionate about
helping individuals,
organizations in
the global community
incorporate the
heart's intelligence
into their day-to-day
experience to build resilience
to challenge and to live
healthier, more fulfilling
lives.
I'm Dr. Sue Morter.
And thank you for
watching "Healing Matrix."
[MUSIC PLAYING]